LENZ

Georg Büchner

Translated by Richard Sieburth

archipelago books 2004 



THE 20TH, Lenz walked through the mountains. Snow on the peaks and upper slopes, gray rock down into the valleys, swatches of green, boulders, and firs. It was sopping cold, the water trickled down the rocks and leapt across the path. The fir boughs sagged in the damp air. Gray clouds drifted across the sky, but everything so stifling, and then the fog floated up and crept heavy and damp through the bushes, so sluggish, so clumsy. He walked onward, caring little one way or another, to him the path mattered not, now up, now down. He felt no fatigue, except sometimes it annoyed him that he could not walk on his head. At first he felt a tightening in his chest when the rocks skittered away, the gray woods below him shook, and the fog now engulfed the shapes, now half-revealed their powerful limbs; things were building up inside him, he was searching for something, as if for lost dreams, but was finding nothing. Everything seemed so small, so near, so wet, he would have liked to set the earth down behind an oven, he could not grasp why it took so much time to clamber down a slope, to reach a distant point; he was convinced he could cover it all with a pair of strides. Only sometimes when the storms tossed the clouds into the valleys and they floated upwards through the woods and voices awakened on the rocks, like far-echoing thunder at first and then approaching in strong gusts, sounding as if they wanted to chant the praises of the earth in their wild rejoicing, and the clouds galloped by like wild whinnying horses and the sunshine shot through them and emerged and drew its glinting sword on the snowfields so that a bright blinding light knifed over the peaks into the valleys; or sometimes when the storms drove the clouds downwards and tore a light-blue lake into them and the sound of the wind died away and then like the murmur of a lullaby or pealing bells rose up again from the depths of ravines and tips of fir trees and a faint reddishness climbed into the deep blue and small clouds drifted by on silver wings and all the mountain peaks, sharp and firm, glinted and gleamed far across the countryside, he would feel something tearing at his chest, he would stand there, gasping, body bent forward, eyes and mouth open wide, he was convinced he should draw the storm into himself, contain everything within himself, he stretched out and lay over the earth, he burrowed into the universe, it was a pleasure that gave him pain; or he would remain still and lay his head upon the moss and half-close his eyes and then everything receded from him, the earth withdrew beneath him, it became as tiny as a wandering star and dipped into a rushing stream whose clear waters flowed beneath him. But these were only moments, and then he got up, calm, steady, quiet, as if a shadow play had passed before him, he had no memory of anything. Toward evening he came to the mountain ridge, to the snowfield from which one again descended westwards into the plain, he sat down at the crest. Things had grown more quiet toward evening; the clouds lay still and solid in the sky, as far as the eye could see, nothing but peaks, broad downward slopes, and everything so silent, gray, twilit; a terrible solitude came over him, he was alone, all alone, he wanted to talk to himself, but he could not, he hardly dared breathe, the crunch of his foot sounded like thunder beneath him, he had to sit down; he was seized by a nameless anxiety in this emptiness, he was in a void, he sprang to his feet and raced down the slope. It had gotten dark, sky and earth melted together. It was as if something were following him, as if something terrible would overtake him, something no human could bear, as if madness were hunting him down on horseback. At last he heard voices, he saw lights, he breathed easier, he was told Waldbach lay half an hour away. He went through the village, lights shone through the windows, as he passed by he saw children at tables, old women, young girls, the faces all calm and quiet, the light seemed to pour forth from them, he felt at ease, he was soon in the parsonage in Waldbach. They were sitting at the table, he went in; curls of blond hair fell around his pale face, his eyes and mouth twitched, his clothes were torn. Oberlin welcomed him, he took him to be a journeyman. “Welcome, whoever you are.”—I am a friend of . . . and bring you greetings from him. “Your name, if you please?” . . . Lenz. “Aha, it’s appeared in print, hasn’t it? Haven’t I read several plays attributed to a gentleman by this name?” Yes, but I beg you not to judge me by that. They continued talking, he searched for words and they came tumbling out, but it was torture; little by little he calmed down, the cozy room and the tranquil faces looming out of the shadows, the bright face of a child on which all the light seemed to rest, trusting eyes raised in curiosity, and finally the mother sitting quietly back in the shadows, angel-like. He began to talk of his homeland; he sketched its various local costumes, they all pressed around him to join in, he immediately felt at home, his pale child’s face now all smiles, his lively talk; he felt at ease, it was as if familiar figures, forgotten faces were emerging from the dark, old songs were awakening, he was away, far away. Finally it was time to go, he was led across the street, the parsonage was too cramped, he was given a room in the schoolhouse. He went upstairs, it was cold up there, a large room, empty, a high bed off to the back, he placed the lamp on the table and paced back and forth, he thought back on the day, how he had come here, where he was, the room in the parsonage with its lights and kindly faces, it seemed like a shadow, a dream, and emptiness came over him again as it had on the mountain, but he could no longer fill it with anything, the lamp was out, the darkness engulfed everything; he was seized by a nameless anxiety, he sprang to his feet, he ran through the room, down the stairs, out of the house; but in vain, everything dark, nothing, he seemed a dream to himself, stray thoughts flitted by, he grasped after them, he felt he had to keep on saying “Our Father” over and over again; he could no longer find himself, a dark instinct drove him to save himself, he butted against rocks, he tore at himself with his nails, the pain began to restore his consciousness, he threw himself into the fountain, but the water was not deep, he splashed around. Then people appeared, they had heard it, they called out to him. Oberlin came running; Lenz had come back to his senses, to the full consciousness of his condition, he felt at ease again, now he was ashamed and sorry to have frightened the good people, he told them it was his custom to take cold baths and returned upstairs; exhaustion allowed him at last to rest.

The next day went well. With Oberlin through the valley on horseback; broad mountain slopes funneling down from great heights into a narrow winding valley leading this way and that to the upper elevations, great boulder fields fanning out at the base, not much woodland, but everything a gray somber cast, a view to the west into the countryside and onto the mountain range running straight from north to south, the peaks looming huge, solemn, or mute and motionless, like a twilit dream. Enormous masses of light sometimes surging out of the valleys like a golden torrent, then clouds again, heaped around the highest peaks and then climbing down the forests into the valley or darting up and down in the sunbeams like silvery fluttering ghosts; no noise, no movement, no birds, nothing but the sighing of the wind, now near, now far. Specks also appeared, skeletons of huts, straw-covered planks, somber black. People, silent and somber, as if afraid to disturb the peace of their valley, quietly greeted them as they rode by. There was animation in the huts, they crowded around Oberlin, he set things right, offered advice, consolation; trusting looks everywhere, prayer. People recounted dreams, premonitions. Then quickly on to practical matters, the laying of roads, the digging of ditches, visits to the school. Oberlin was tireless, Lenz his constant companion, now conversing, now attending to affairs, now absorbed in nature. It all had a benign and calming effect on him, he often had to look into Oberlin’s eyes, and the immense peace that comes over us in the tranquility of nature, in the middle of the woods, on liquid moonlit summer nights, appeared even closer to him in this quiet gaze, this noble solemn face. He was shy, but he made observations, he spoke, Oberlin found his conversation agreeable, and the childish charm of Lenz’s face gave him great pleasure. But things were only bearable for him as long as the light lay in the valley; towards evening he was seized by a strange anxiety, he wanted to chase after the sun; as objects gradually grew more shadowy, everything seemed so dreamlike, so menacing, he felt the anxiety of children who sleep in the dark; it was as if he were blind; now it was intensifying, the nightmare of madness was settling at his feet, the hopeless realization that everything was merely his dream opened before him, he clung to every object, figures fled by him, he pressed toward them, they were shadows, life drained from him and his limbs went stiff. He spoke, he sang, he recited passages from Shakespeare, he grasped after everything that used to make his blood race, he tried everything, but cold, cold. He then felt the urge to rush outdoors, the sparse light scattered through the night, once his eyes had gotten used to the dark, made him better, he plunged into the fountain, the harsh effect of the water made him better, also he secretly hoped he would contract an illness, he now organized his bathing so there would be less noise. Yet the more he grew accustomed to this life, the calmer he became, he helped out Oberlin, sketched, read the Bible; old vanished hopes rose anew in him; the New Testament spoke to him so directly here, and one morning he ventured forth. When Oberlin recounted how an invisible hand had steadied him on the bridge, how his eyes had been dazzled by a blinding light on a mountain, how he had heard a voice, how it had spoken to him in the night, and how God had entered into him so completely that he took his Bible reader out of his pocket like a child in order to seek its advice, this faith, this eternal heaven in life, this existence in God; now for the first time Holy Scripture was hitting home. How Nature so affected these people, divine mystery in everything; but not violently majestic, rather taken on faith!—That morning he ventured forth, snow had fallen during the night, bright sunshine lay over the valley, but the countryside further off half in fog. He soon left the path, up a gentle slope, no trace of footprints anymore, past a forest of firs, the sun chiseling the crystals, the snow fine and powdery, here and there the faint tracks of game leading into the mountains. Nothing astir in the air except a quiet breeze, the rustle of a bird dusting the snow off its tail. Everything so silent, and the expanse of trees, their white feathers swaying in the dark blue air. He felt more and more at home, the overpowering solid planes and lines that had sometimes seemed to address him in loud tones were blanketed over, he was suffused with a cozy Christmas feeling, at times it seemed his mother might loom forth from behind a tree and tell him she had arranged all this as a special gift; as he made his way down he saw a rainbow haloing his shadow and felt as if something had touched his brow, the Being was speaking to him. He came back down. Oberlin was in the room, Lenz went up to him cheerfully and said he would like to deliver a sermon at some point. “Are you a theologian?” Yes!—“Fine, this coming Sunday.”

Lenz went up to his room contented, he thought of a text for the sermon and his mind drifted off, and his nights grew peaceful. Sunday morning arrived, a thaw had set in. Clouds scudding overhead, blue sky in between, the church on a spur of the mountain, the churchyard surrounding it. Lenz stood above while the bell rang and the churchgoers, women and girls in their somber black local costumes, white handkerchiefs folded on their hymnals and sprigs of rosemary, converged from all sides on the small paths leading up and down between the rocks. Bursts of sunshine playing over the valley, a soft lazy breeze, the landscape afloat in fragrance, distant bells, the whole as if dissolving into a single melodious wave.

The snow was gone from the small churchyard, dark moss beneath the black crosses, a late rosebush leaning against the cemetery wall, late flowers rising through the moss, sun at moments, then the dark. The service began, human voices joined into a pure clear sound; the impression of gazing into a pure transparent mountain stream. The singing trailed off, Lenz spoke, he was shy, the music had completely melted his paralysis away, all his pain was now awake and lay within his heart. He was suffused with a sweet sense of infinite well-being. He spoke simply to the people, they shared in his suffering, and it was comforting that he could offer sleep to various eyes tired from crying and peace to tortured hearts, that he could show the way to heaven to existences tortured by material needs, all these muffled sorrows. He had grown more steady as he came to the end, then the voices began again:

Burst, O divine woe,

The floodgates of my soul;

May pain be my reward,

In pain I love the Lord.

The pressure within him, the music, the pain, shook him to the core. The universe was an open wound; it caused him deep nameless pain. Another existence now, the quiver of heavenly lips bending down over him and sucking on his; he returned to his lonely room. He was alone, alone! Then the springwaters gushed forth, tears poured from his eyes, he crumpled into himself, his limbs twitched, it was as if he needed to dissolve, he could find no end to the ecstasy; finally his mind began to clear, he felt deep quiet pity for himself, he wept for himself, his head sank onto his chest, he dozed off, the full moon hung in the sky, his hair fell over his temples and face, the tears clung to his eyelashes and dried on his cheeks, he now lay there alone, everything peaceful and silent and cold, and the moon shone the whole night through, above the mountains.

The following morning he came down, he very calmly told Oberlin how his mother had appeared to him in the night; she had emerged from the dark churchyard wall in a white dress and had a white and a red rose pinned to her chest; she had then sunk into a corner and the roses had slowly grown over her, she had no doubt died; he had felt quite calm about this. Oberlin then remarked that when his father died he was alone in the fields and had then heard a voice so that he knew his father was dead and when he came back home this was indeed so. This led them further, Oberlin spoke of the mountain people, of girls who could detect water and metal under the ground, of men who had been possessed on certain peaks and wrestled with spirits; he also told of how he had once been transported into a state of somnambulism upon looking into the empty depths of a mountain pool. Lenz told him that the spirit of water had come over him, that he had then experienced something of its special essence. He continued on: the simplest, purest creatures were closest to elemental nature, the more refined a man’s mental life and feelings, the more blunted this elemental sense became; he did not consider it to be a higher plane, it lacked the requisite self-sufficiency, but he believed it must be an endless delight to feel moved by the unique life of each and every form; to have a soul for stones, metals, water and plants; to take in every being in nature into oneself as in a dream, as flowers do with the air at every waxing and waning of the moon.

He continued to speak his mind, how all things were imbued with an indefinable harmony, a note, a bliss that in higher forms of life became more pronounced, more resonant, perceiving the world with a greater variety of organs, and was thereby all the more susceptible, whereas in the lower forms everything was more subdued, more circumscribed, yet thereby more at peace with itself. He pursued this even further. Oberlin interrupted him, this was leading too astray from his simple ways. On another occasion Oberlin showed him color charts, he explained the relationship of each color to mankind, he adduced the twelve apostles, each represented by a color. Lenz took this all in, he carried things further, began having anxious dreams, and started reading the Apocalypse like Stilling, consulting his Bible at great length.

Around this time Kaufmann arrived in Steintal with his bride-to-be. Lenz was at first uneasy about meeting him, he had carved out such a nice little place for himself, this tiny bit of peace was so precious to him, and now someone was coming his way who reminded him of so much, with whom he had to speak, converse, who knew of his situation. Oberlin knew nothing at all; he had taken him in, cared for him; for him it was the hand of God that had sent this unfortunate creature his way, he loved him dearly. Besides, it was fitting that he be there, he belonged among them as if he had been there forever, and no one asked from where he had come and where he was bound. At table Lenz was again in fine spirits, the talk turned to literature, he was in his element; the era of idealism was just then beginning, Kaufmann was among its adherents, Lenz vehemently disagreed. He said: the writers who were purported to offer up reality had no idea of what it was, even though they were more bearable than those who wanted to transfigure it. He said: the good Lord has without a doubt made the world as it should be and there is no way we can scratch together anything better, our sole goal should be to imitate him in a small way. What I demand in all things is life, the potentiality of existence, and that’s that; we need not then ask whether it be beautiful or ugly, the feeling that whatever’s been created possesses life outweighs these two and should be the sole criterion in matters of art. As it is, we encounter it rarely, we find it in Shakespeare and it rings forth fully in folk songs, now and then in Goethe. Everything else can be tossed into the fire. These people can’t even draw a doghouse. They claim they want idealistic figures, but from what I’ve seen, they’re all just a bunch of wooden puppets. This idealism represents the most disgraceful contempt for human nature. Let them just once try to descend into the life of the humblest person and reproduce all the twitches, all the winks, all the subtle, barely noticed play of facial features; he had tried something of the sort in “The Tutor” and “The Soldiers.” They are the most prosaic people under the sun; but the pulse of feeling courses through nearly everyone, only the sheathings through which it must break are more or less thick. One merely needs the eyes and ears for this. Yesterday as I was walking along above the valley, I saw two girls sitting on a rock, one was putting up her hair, the other helping her; and the golden hair was hanging free, and a pale, solemn face, and yet so young, and the black peasant dress, and the other one so absorbed in her task. The finest, most heartfelt paintings of the Old German School scarcely convey an inkling of this. At times one wishes one were a Medusa’s head in order to turn a group like this into stone and call everybody over to have a look. They stood up, the lovely group was destroyed; but as they made their way down among the rocks, there was yet another tableau. The finest images, the most soaring sounds, group themselves, dissolve. Only one thing remains, an infinite beauty passing from form to form, eternally unfolding, transformed, but of course one cannot always capture it and stick it in museums or set it to music and call everybody over, young and old alike, and have them all prattle on about it, going into raptures. One has to love mankind in order to penetrate into the unique existence of each being, nobody can be too humble, too ugly, only then can you understand them; the most insignificant face makes a deeper impression than the mere sensation of beauty and one can allow the figures to emerge without copying anything into them from the outside where no life, no muscle, no pulse surges or swells. Kaufmann objected that he would find no models of the Apollo Belvedere or a Raphael Madonna in reality. So what, he replied, I have to admit they leave me quite cold, if I work at it within myself, I suppose I may end up feeling something, but I am the one making all the effort. The writers and painters I prefer are those who make nature so utterly real to me that their works move me to feel, everything else is plain annoying. I prefer the Dutch painters to the Italians, they are the only ones who make sense; I know of only two paintings, both Dutch, that have made the same impression on me as the New Testament; one of them, I know not by whom, is Christ and the Disciples at Emmaus. When one reads of how the disciples went forth, all of nature immediately lies within these few words. Shadowy night is falling, a solid red streak on the horizon, the road half in darkness, a stranger approaches, they talk, he breaks bread, in their simple humanity they recognize who he is and the divine suffering in his features speaks to them distinctly, and they grow afraid, for it has gotten dark, and something incomprehensible comes over them but it is not some ghostly dread; it is as if the dear departed one were coming up to you in the twilight just as he used to, and so it is in the painting, with its uniform brownish cast and the shadowy stillness of the evening. Then another one. A woman is sitting in her room, prayer book in hand. The room all tidied up for a Sunday, the sand strewn, cozy, clean and warm. The woman had not been able to go to church and she is holding service at home, the window is open, she sits facing it and it is as if the village bells were drifting over the wide flat landscape into the window and the singing of the nearby congregation were echoing forth from the church, and the woman is following the text. — He continued on in this fashion, people listened attentively, many points were being made, he had grown flush from all the talking, now all smiles, now serious, he tossed his curls of blond hair. He had completely forgotten himself. After the meal Kaufmann drew him aside. He had received letters from Lenz’s father, his son was to return, provide assistance. Kaufmann told him he was throwing away his life here, squandering it to no purpose, he should set himself a goal and so on and so forth. Lenz retorted: Away from here? Away? Back home? Go crazy there? You know, this is the only place I can bear; if I couldn’t now and then go up into the mountains and look over the countryside and then come back down to the house and walk through the garden and look in through the window, I’d go crazy!! Crazy!! Leave me in peace! Just a little peace, now that I am feeling a bit better! Back home? This makes no sense, these two words ruin everything. Everybody needs something; if you find peace, what more could you have! To be always scrambling upwards, struggling, and thus throwing away everything granted by the moment; to go always hungry in the hope of satiety; to go thirsty while clear springs leap over your path. Things are now tolerable, and this is where I want to stay put; why? Why? Because I am feeling well; what does my father want? What can he give me? Out of the question! Leave me in peace. He was furious, Kaufmann left, Lenz was in a foul mood.

The next day Kaufmann wanted to leave, he talked Oberlin into going to Switzerland with him. The desire to meet Lavater in person, whom he had long known through letters, determined him. He agreed. The preparations delayed their departure by a day. This perturbed Lenz, to rid himself of his constant torment he had been anxiously clinging to everything; at certain moments he became deeply aware he was fabricating it all to his own advantage; he dealt with himself like a sick child, he rid himself of certain thoughts, overpowering emotions only with great anguish, then was again driven back onto them with even greater violence, he shivered, his hair nearly stood on end, until he finally emerged victorious after the most extraordinary exertions. He took refuge in a figure who always hovered before his eyes, and in Oberlin; his words, his face did him an immense amount of good. So it was with anxiety that he contemplated his departure.

Lenz was uneasy about remaining in the house on his own. The weather had turned mild and he decided to accompany Oberlin into the mountains. On the other side, where the valleys meet the plain, they parted. He returned back alone. He wandered through the mountains this way and that, broad planes inclined into the valleys, little woodland, nothing but powerful lines and in the distance the wide smoky plain, a brisk breeze in the air, nowhere a trace of man other than here and there an abandoned hut where shepherds spent the summer, aslant on a slope. He grew still, perhaps even dreamy, everything blended into a single line like a wave rising and falling between heaven and earth, he felt as if he were lying beside an endless ocean that was gently rocking up and down. Sometimes he just sat there, then he began walking again, but slowly, dreamily. He was following no path. It was pitch dark when he came to an inhabited hut, on the slope down to Steintal. The door was locked, he went to the window through which a gleam of light was shimmering. A lamp illuminated little more than a single spot, its light fell on the pale face of a girl who was resting behind it, eyes half-open, quietly moving her lips. Further back in the dark sat an old woman who was singing out of a hymnal in a raspy voice. After much knocking she opened; she was half-deaf, she brought Lenz some food and showed him a place to sleep, continuing her singing all the while. The girl had not moved. Some time later a man came in, he was tall and haggard, traces of gray hair, with a restless troubled face. He went over to the child, she jerked convulsively and grew restless. He took a dried herb from the wall and laid its leaves on her hand and she quieted down, droning intelligible words in drawn out, penetrating tones. He recounted how he had heard a voice in the mountains and then had seen sheet lightning over the valleys, he had been seized by it too and had wrestled with it like Jacob. He fell to his knees and quietly prayed with fervor while the sick girl sang in drawn-out, softly lingering tones. Then he went to bed.

Lenz dozed off into dreams and then heard the ticking of the clock in his sleep. Through the quiet singing of the girl and the voice of the old woman came the rushing of the wind, now near, now far, and the moon, now bright, now veiled, threw its shifting light over the room as in a dream. At one point the sounds grew louder, the girl was speaking clearly and distinctly, she was saying how there was a church on a cliff on the other side. Lenz looked up and she was sitting behind the table, eyes wide open, and the moon cast its quiet light on her features from which an unearthly radiance seemed to pour, while the old woman rasped on, and amid this shifting and failing of the light and the singing and the speaking Lenz finally fell fast asleep.

He woke up early, everyone was asleep in the twilit room, even the girl had become quiet, she lay pitched backwards, hands folded under her left cheek; the ghostliness had disappeared from her features, her expression was now one of indescribable suffering. He went to the window and opened it, the cold morning air drove against him. The house lay at the end of a narrow deep valley that opened to the east, red rays shot through the gray dawn sky into the twilit valley that lay in white mist and they glinted on the gray rocks and struck the windows of the huts. The man woke up, his eyes met a picture illuminated on the wall, they stared fixedly at it, now he began to move his lips and prayed quietly, then loudly and ever louder. Meanwhile people came into the hut, they fell to their knees in silence. The girl lay there twitching, the old woman rasped her song and chatted with the neighbors. The people informed Lenz that the man had come to the region long ago, no one knew from where; he was reputed to be a saint, he could see the water under the ground and conjure up spirits, and people made pilgrimages to him. Lenz also learned that he had ended up very far from Steintal, he left with some woodcutters who were headed that way. He was glad to be in company; he had now become increasingly uneasy about the powerful man who seemed at times to be speaking in fearsome tones. Also he was afraid to be with himself when he was alone.

He came home. But the past night had made a powerful impression on him. The world had felt luminous to him, and within himself something was stirring and swarming toward an abyss toward which he was being swept by an inexorable force. He burrowed into himself. He ate little; half the nights in prayer and feverish dreams. The pressure building, and then beaten back in exhaustion; he lay there in hot tears, and then suddenly regained strength and got back up on his feet, cold and calm, his tears like ice to him, he had to laugh. The higher he drove himself the deeper he plunged. Everything streamed back together again. Twinges of his former condition played through him, searchlights cast through the wild chaos of his mind. During the day he usually sat in the room downstairs, Madame Oberlin moved back and forth, he sketched, painted, read, grasped after any distraction. Hastily from one thing to the next. He now especially fastened upon Madame Oberlin as she sat there, her black hymnal before her, next to a house plant, her youngest child between her knees; he also fussed over the child a great deal. He was at one point sitting there and was suddenly seized by anxiety, he sprang to his feet, paced back and forth. The door half open, he heard the maid singing, at first unintelligible, then came the words

In this world no joy for me

My sweet love is gone away.

Which struck him to the core, he almost fell apart hearing it. Madame Oberlin glanced over at him. He gathered up his courage, he could no longer remain silent, he had to bring it up. “Dearest Madame Oberlin, could you tell how that young lady is doing, whose fate weighs upon my heart like a hundredweight?” “But Herr Lenz, I know nothing of this.”

He fell silent again and paced rapidly up and down the room; then he began again: You see, I want to leave; God, you are the only people with whom I could bear to live, and yet — and yet, I have to leave, to go to her — but I cannot, I must not. — He was highly agitated and disappeared.

Toward evening Lenz returned; dusk was settling over the room; he sat down next to Madame Oberlin. You see, he began again, when she walked through the room that way, half-singing to herself, and every step of hers was music, there was so much joy in her, and this flowed over into me, I was always at ease when I watched her or when she leaned her head on me that way, and God! God — how long since I have felt at ease . . . Wholly a child; it was as if the world were too wide for her; she withdrew into herself, she sought out the tightest little spot in the entire house, and there she would sit, as if her entire happiness depended on this one small spot, and then I would feel the same way too; I could have played like a child back then. Now I feel so confined, so confined, you see, sometimes I feel as if my hands were hitting up against the sky; O I’m suffocating! Often it’s as if I feel a physical pain, here on my left side, in the arm I used to hold her with. Yet I can no longer picture her, the image escapes me, and this tortures me, only when my mind clears completely do I feel happy again. — He often spoke to Madame Oberlin about this on later occasions, but usually only in fragmentary sentences; she hardly knew how to answer, but it helped.

Meanwhile his religious torments persisted. The emptier, the colder, the deader he felt inside, the more he was driven to awaken a fiery passion within himself, he had memories of the times when everything used to well up in him, when all his emotions left him panting; and now so dead. He despaired of himself, then he threw himself down, wrung his hands, stirred everything up within himself; but dead! Dead! Then he implored God to send him a sign, he burrowed into himself, fasted, lay on the floor dreaming. On the third of February he heard a child had died in Fouday, he clung to this like an obsession. He retired to his room and fasted for a day. On the fourth he suddenly burst into Madame Oberlin’s room, he had smudged his face with ash and requested an old sack; she was taken by fright, he was given what he wanted. He draped himself in the sack like a penitent and set off in the direction of Fouday. The people in the valley were already used to him; he was the object of many odd tales. He entered the house where the child lay. People were calmly going about their business; they showed him a room, the child lay in a shift on a bed of straw on a wooden table.

Lenz shuddered when he touched the cold limbs and saw the half-open glassy eyes. The child seemed so forsaken and he himself so alone and isolated; he threw himself on the corpse; death terrified him, raw pain shot through him, these features, this quiet face were soon to rot away, he fell to his knees, he prayed with the full misery of despair that God send him a sign and bring the child back to life, he being so weak and wretched; then he burrowed deep into himself and tunneled all his willpower toward a single point and sat there for a long time, rigid. Then he got up and took the child’s hand and said loudly and firmly: Arise and walk! But the walls echoed back his voice so dispassionately they seemed to mock him, and the corpse remained cold. He fell to the ground, half out of his mind, then, driven back onto his feet, fled into the mountains. Clouds raced over the moon; now total darkness, now the elusive foggy landscape reappearing in the moonshine. He raced this way and that. A song of hell triumphant was in his breast. The wind roared like a chorus of Titans, he felt as if he could thrust a colossal fist up into the heavens and grab God and drag him down through his clouds; as if he could grind up the world between his teeth and spit it into the Creator’s face; he cursed, he blasphemed. He reached the ridge of the mountain, the uncertain light dilating down into the white masses of rocks, the sky a stupid blue eye and the silly moon just hanging there, ridiculous. Lenz had to laugh out loud, and as he laughed atheism crept over him and held him fast in its firm and quiet grasp. He no longer knew what had so disturbed him earlier, he was freezing, he wanted to go to bed now, and he made his way cold and imperturbable through the uncanny darkness — everything was empty and hollow to him, he broke into a run and went to bed.

The next day Lenz was seized with great horror at his yesterday’s condition, he was now standing at the abyss, driven by an insane desire to peer into it over and over, and to repeat this torture. Then his anxiety intensified, Sin and the Holy Ghost stood before him.

Several days later Oberlin returned from Switzerland, far earlier than expected. Lenz was disturbed by this. Yet his spirits rose when Oberlin told him about his friends in Alsace. Oberlin moved about the room, unpacked, put things away. He talked of Pfeffel praising the life of a country clergyman. He admonished him to follow his father’s wishes, to live in keeping with his vocation, to return home. He said to him: Honor thy father and mother and so on and so forth. Lenz was quite upset by the discussion; he heaved deep sighs, tears welled in his eyes, he spoke in a broken fashion. I can’t stand it; do you want to send me away? The way to God lies only in you. As for me, I’m done for! I’ve deserted my faith, damned for eternity, I am the eternal Jew. Oberlin reminded him Jesus had died for this, if he fervently turned to him he would partake of his grace.

Lenz raised his head, wrung his hands and said: Ah! Ah! Divine consolation. Then he suddenly asked in a very friendly fashion how the young lady was doing. Oberlin said he knew nothing of all this, but that he wanted to offer him help and counsel in all things, only he would have to first specify the place, the circumstances, and the individual. His only reply was broken words: Ah she is dead? Is she still alive? O you angel, she loved me — I loved her, she was worthy of it, O you angel. Damned jealousy, I sacrificed her — she was still in love with somebody else too — I loved her, she was worthy of it — O dear mother, she loved me as well. I am a murderer. Oberlin answered: perhaps all these people are still alive, perhaps happy; be this as it may, God would, if he just turned to him, do these people so much good through his prayers and tears that the benefit they gained from him would perhaps far outweigh the injury he had inflicted. This quieted him down by and by and he returned to his painting.

That afternoon he returned, a scrap of fur on his left shoulder and in his hand a bundle of switches, which had been given to Oberlin together with a letter for Lenz. He handed Oberlin the bundle with the request that he beat him with it. Oberlin took the switches out of his hands, pressed a few kisses on his lips and said: these were the sole blows he intended to mete out to him, he should remain calm, work things out with God on his own, no amount of beatings could eradicate a single one of his sins; Jesus had seen to that, he should turn to him. He left.

At supper he was as usual somewhat pensive. Yet he spoke of all sorts of things, but anxiously, hurriedly. Around midnight Oberlin was awoken by a noise. Lenz was running around the courtyard, shouting the name Friederike in a harsh hollow voice with great rapidity, confusion and despair, then he threw himself into the basin of the fountain and splashed around, got out, back up to his room, then back down to the basin, and so on several times, at last he grew quiet. The maids who slept in the children’s room beneath him said they had often, and especially that very night, heard a deep humming noise that they could only compare to the sound of a shepherd’s pipe. Perhaps it was him moaning in his hollow, ghastly, desperate voice.

The following morning Lenz was slow to appear. Finally Oberlin went up to his room, he was lying in bed calmly, not budging. Oberlin had to repeat his questions at length before getting an answer: Yes, Reverend, you see, boredom! Boredom! O, sheer boredom, what more can I say, I have already drawn all the figures on the wall. Oberlin said to him he should turn to God; he laughed and said: if I were as lucky as you to have discovered such an agreeable pastime, yes, one could indeed wile away one’s time that way. Tedium the root of it all. Most people pray only out of boredom; others fall in love out of boredom, still others are virtuous or depraved, but I am nothing, nothing at all, I cannot even kill myself: too boring:

O God, drowned in thy waves of light,

Imprisoned by thy midday bright,

My waking eyes are dreadful sore,

O will the night come nevermore?

Oberlin looked at him indignantly and made to leave. Lenz rushed after him and with a weird look in his eye: you see, I’ve just had this idea, if I could only determine whether I’m dreaming or waking: you see, it’s a fine idea, let’s try it out; and he slipped back into bed. That afternoon Oberlin wanted to pay a visit nearby; his wife had already left; he was about to leave when there was a knock on the door and Lenz entered, body bent over, head hanging down, ashes scattered all over his face and clothing, his right hand clutching at his left arm. He asked Oberlin to tug at his arm, he had dislocated it, he had thrown himself out of the window, because no one had seen him he did not want to tell anyone. Oberlin was quite alarmed but said nothing, he did what Lenz had asked him and immediately wrote to the school-master in Bellefosse, requesting he come down and giving him the directions. Then he rode off. The man arrived. Lenz had often seen him before and was quite attached to him. He made as if he had dropped by to chat with Oberlin and would soon be on his way. Lenz asked him to stay and so they remained there together. Lenz suggested a stroll to Fouday. He visited the grave of the child he had tried to awake, knelt down several times, kissed the earth of the grave, seemed to be praying, although in considerable disarray, tore something from the flowers placed on the grave as a memento, set back off to Waldbach, turned back again, Sebastian by his side. At times he walked slowly and complained his limbs had grown very weak, then he would pick up astonishing speed, the landscape was making him anxious, it was so narrow he was afraid he would bump into everything. He was in a state of indescribable distress, his companion was getting on his nerves, perhaps he had guessed his purpose, and he sought ways to be rid of him. Sebastian appeared to give in to him but found a secret way to alert his brother of the danger, and now Lenz had two guardians instead of one. He led them this way and that, finally he returned in the direction of Waldbach, and as they approached the village, he wheeled around like a flash and bolted back toward Fouday like a stag. The men chased after him. While they were looking for him in Fouday, two shopkeepers approached and told them that a stranger had been tied up in a house who claimed to be a murderer but certainly couldn’t be one. They ran to the house and discovered this was so. At his violent insistence, a young man had tied him up out of fright. They untied him and brought him back safely to Waldbach, to which Oberlin had in the meantime returned with his wife. He looked bewildered, but when he realized that he was being taken back in with love and affection, his spirits rose, his face brightened, he thanked his escorts kindly and courteously, and the evening passed quietly. Oberlin implored him not to go bathing anymore, to remain quietly in his bed at night and when he could not sleep, to converse with God. He promised and did so the following night, the maids heard him praying almost the whole night through. — The following morning he came into Oberlin’s room with a contented look on his face. After they had spoken of this and that, he said in an exceptionally friendly fashion: My dearest Reverend, the young lady of whom I spoke to you has died, yes died, the angel. How did you find this out? — Hieroglyphs, hieroglyphs — and then cast his eyes heavenwards and again: yes, dead — hieroglyphs. Nothing further could be gotten out of him. He sat down and wrote a few letters, and then handed them over to Oberlin, requesting that he add a few lines.

His condition had in the meantime become more hopeless, all the peace he had derived from the nearness of Oberlin and the tranquility of the valley had vanished; the world he had wanted to benefit from had a gaping rip in it, he had no hate, no love, no hope, a horrible emptiness, and yet a tormented desire to fill it. He had nothing. Whatever he did, he did in full self-awareness, and yet some inner instinct drove him onward. When he was alone he felt so terribly lonely he constantly spoke to himself aloud, called out, then grew afraid again, it seemed to him as if the voice of a stranger had spoken to him. He often faltered in conversation, he was seized by indescribable anxiety, he had mislaid the end of his sentences; then he thought he should hold on to the last word uttered and go on talking, only with great effort did he suppress this urge. The good people were deeply alarmed when sometimes he was sitting among them in quiet moments and speaking freely and then began stammering and an indescribable anxiety descended over his features and he would violently grab at the arms of the persons sitting closest to him and only then return to his senses by and by. When he was alone or reading, things got even worse, at times all his mental activity would fix upon a single idea; if he thought about another person, or vividly pictured them, it was as if he became that person, he grew completely confused, and yet at the same time he felt the constant urge to deliberately manipulate everything around him in his mind; nature, other people, Oberlin alone excepted, everything as in a dream, cold; he amused himself by standing houses on their roofs, dressing and undressing people, coming up with the most outlandish pranks. At times he felt an irresistible urge to carry the thing out, and then he made horrid faces. Once he was sitting next to Oberlin, the cat lying across from them on a chair, suddenly his eyes locked into a stare, he fixed them upon the animal, then he slowly edged out of his chair, as did the cat, bewitched by his gaze, horribly frightened, bristling with fear, Lenz hissing back at it, his face horribly contorted, the two going at each other as if in desperation, Madame Oberlin finally getting up to pull them apart. Which again caused him to feel deeply ashamed. The incidents during the night reached a horrific pitch. Only with the greatest effort did he fall asleep, having tried at length to fill the horrible void. Then he fell into a dreadful state between sleeping and waking; he bumped into something ghastly, hideous, madness took hold of him, he sat up, screaming violently, bathed in sweat, and only gradually found himself again. He had to begin with the simplest things in order to come back to himself. In fact he was not the one doing this but rather a powerful instinct for self-preservation, it was as if he were double, the one half attempting to save the other, calling out to itself; he told stories, he recited poems out loud, wracked with anxiety, until he came to his senses.

He also experienced these attacks during the day, they were even more frightful then; the light of day had previously warded them off. At these moments it seemed to him as if he alone existed, as if the world lay only in his imagination, as if there were nothing but himself, eternally damned, Satan himself; alone, tormented by his imaginings. He chased through his past life at breakneck speed, saying: consistent, consistent; whenever somebody said something: inconsistent, inconsistent; it was the abyss of irreparable madness, an eternity of madness. The instinct to preserve his sanity drove him into Oberlin’s arms, he clung to him as if wanting to squeeze into him, he was the only being alive to him and through whom life might again be revealed. Gradually Oberlin’s words brought him back to his senses, he went down on his knees before Oberlin, his hands in Oberlin’s, his face, covered with cold sweat, in the latter’s lap, his whole body trembling and shivering. Oberlin felt enormous pity for him, the family went down on their knees and prayed for the unfortunate being, the maids fled away and said he was possessed. And when he grew calmer, it was like the misery of a child, he sobbed, he was seized with deep deep pity for himself; these were his happiest moments. Oberlin spoke to him of God. Lenz quietly drew away and looked at him with infinite sorrow on his face and finally said: as for myself, were I almighty, you see, if I were, if I could no longer put up with all this suffering, I would just save, save everyone, for all I want is peace, peace, just a little peace, and to be able to sleep. Oberlin said this was blasphemy. Lenz shook his head dejectedly. The half-hearted attempts at suicide that he kept on making were not entirely serious, it was less the desire to die, death for him held no promise of peace or hope, than the attempt, at moments of excruciating anxiety or dull apathy bordering on non-existence, to snap back into himself through physical pain. But his happiest moments were when his mind seemed to gallop away on some madcap idea. This at least provided some relief and the wild look in his eye was less horrible than the anxious thirsting for deliverance, the never-ending torture of unrest! He would often beat his head against the wall or inflict sharp physical pain on himself in other ways.

On the morning of the 8th he remained in bed, Oberlin went upstairs; he was lying on the bed almost naked, and thrashing around. Oberlin wanted to cover him, but he complained bitterly about everything being so heavy, he doubted he would be able to walk, he was now finally realizing just how horribly heavy the air was. Oberlin urged him to gather up his courage. But he remained in this condition for the greater part of the day, and also refused to eat. Towards evening Oberlin was called to Bellefosse to visit a sick person. The weather was mild and the moon was out. On his way back he encountered Lenz. He seemed entirely rational and conversed calmly and amiably with Oberlin. The latter asked him not to stray too far, he promised this; as he was wandering off he suddenly turned around and sidled up to Oberlin and blurted out: you see, dear Reverend, if I no longer had to listen to this it would be of great help to me. “Listen to what, my dear friend?” Can’t you hear it, can’t you hear that hideous voice screaming across the entire horizon, it’s what’s usually called silence and ever since I’ve been in this quiet valley I can’t get it out of my ears, it keeps me up at night, oh dear Reverend, if I could only manage to sleep again. He then wandered off shaking his head. Oberlin returned to Walbach and was considering sending someone after him when he heard him climbing the stairs to his room. A moment later something crashed into the courtyard with such a loud thud that Oberlin could not conceive it could have been made by a person falling. The nursemaid came, deathly pale and trembling all over.

He sat in the coach with cold resignation as they drove out of the valley toward the west. He cared little where they were taking him; on the several occasions when the coach was put at risk by the bad road, he remained seated quite calmly; nothing mattered to him at all. In this condition he traversed the mountains. Towards evening they reached the valley of the Rhine. Little by little they left the mountains behind, now rising in the red glow of dusk like a wave of dark blue crystal and on whose warm crest the red rays of evening played; above the plain at the foot of the mountains lay a shimmering bluish web. Night was falling as they approached Strasbourg; a high full moon, all the distant objects dark, only the nearby mountain forming a sharp line, the earth like a golden goblet over whose rim the golden ripples of the moon foamed. Lenz stared out quietly, no misgivings, no stress, just a dull anxiety building up inside him the more the objects disappeared into the dark. They had to stop over for the night, he made several more attempts on his life but was too closely watched. The following morning he entered Strasbourg under dreary rainy skies. He seemed quite rational, conversed with people; he acted like everybody else, but a terrible emptiness lay within him, he felt no more anxiety, no desire; he saw his existence as a necessary burden. — And so he lived on.
