  IMPROBABLE VERACITIES
 HEINRICH VON KLEIST
- Berliner Abendblatter, January 10, 
 translated by Carol Jacobs


 "Three stories," said an old officer at a gathering, "are of the type
 that, although I myself completely believe them, were I to tell them, I
 would run the risk, nevertheless, of being taken for a windbag. For people
 demand of truth, as its primary requirement, that it be probable. And yet
 probability, as experience teaches us, is not always on the side of truth."
 Tell them, called several members of the gathering, tell them!-for
 the officer was known as a bright and esteemed man who was never guilty
 of lies.

 The officer said laughing that he wanted to oblige the company, but
 he explained once again beforehand that, in this particular case, he made
 no claim for their belief.

 The company in return promised him their belief in advance: they
 simply exhorted him to speak and listened.

 "On a march in the Rhine campaign," began the officer, "I noticed,
 after a battle we had had with the enemy, a soldier who walked erect, with
 gun and pack, in rank and file, although he had a shot through the middle
 of his chest: at least one saw the hole in front of the strap of his
 ammunition pocket, where the bullet had entered, and another in back, in
 his jacket, where it had left. The officers, who couldn't believe their eyes
 at this strange sight, ordered him repeatedly to go behind the front lines
 and get his wounds dressed: but the man assured them that he had no
 pain whatsoever and asked that they not separate him from his regiment
 for the sake of a ricochet shot [Prellschusses], as he called it. That evening,
 when we had returned to the camp, the surgeon who had been called in
 examined his wounds and found that the bullet, having ricocheted [zuruick-
 geprellt] from the breastbone that it had lacked the force to penetrate,
 had slid between the ribs and skin, that stretched in an elastic manner,
 around the entire body, and, in back, since it ultimately hit against the
 backbone, had gone back to its original perpendicular direction and had
 once again broken through the skin. Moreover, this small flesh wound
 gave the sick man nothing but a wound-fever, and, when a few days had
 passed, he once again stood in rank and file."

 What? asked several members of the gathering, stunned, and they
 thought they had not heard correctly.

 The bullet? Around the entire body? In a circle?-The company had
 difficulty in repressing their laughter.

 "That was the first story," said the officer, as he took a pinch of snuff
 and became silent.

 Good heavens! a country gentleman burst out-there you are right.
 This story is the kind that cannot be believed.

 "Eleven years later," said the officer, "in the year 1803, I found myself
 with a friend in the town of KOnigstin in Sachsen, near to which, as is well 
 known, about a half-hour away, at the edge of an extremely steep, perhaps three-hundred foot high benk of the Elbe river, there is an important stone quarry. The workers
 tend, in the case of large blocks, when they can no longer get to it with tools, to throw
 solid objects, especially pipe stems, into the fissure, and they leave the business of fully
 separating the block from the cliff to the wedge-shaped [keilf6rmig] working force of
 these small objects. It so happened that just at this time an enormous block measuring
 several thousand cubic feet was ready at the quarry for its fall to the surface at the
 bank of the Elbe. And since this moment is so remarkable, because of the thunder that
 reverberates [widerhallenden] strangely in the mountains and many other phenomena
 that arise from the shock to the earth that cannot be calculated, we, my friend and I,
 along with many other inhabitants of the city, betook ourselves every day, evenings,
 to the quarry, in order to catch the moment when the block would fall. The block fell,
 however, in the noon hour, as we were sitting at the table in the K6nigstein inn, and it
 was only at five o'clock towards evening that we had time to walk out there and to
 make inquiries about the circumstances under which it had fallen. But what had been
 the result of this fall? First of all you have to know that between the rock wall of the
 quarry and the bed of the Elbe was located a considerable strip of land, taking up
 about fifty feet in width, such that the block (which is here the important thing) did
 not fall directly into the water of the Elbe but rather onto the sandy area of this strip of
 land. An Elbe barge, gentlemen, that was the result of this fall, was, by means of the
 pressure of the air that was thus produced, an Elbe barge was placed on dry land-a
 barge that was about 60 feet long and 30 wide, heavily laden with wood, lay on the
 other, opposite bank of the Elbe. These eyes saw it in the sand-what am I saying? The
 next day, they even saw the workers who were laboring with levers and cylinders to
 get it afloat once again and to get it down from the bank and back into the water. It is
 probable that the whole Elbe (the surface of it) overflowed for a moment, spilled over
 the other flat bank, and left the barge there, it being a' solid object, just as a piece of
 wood remains on the edge of a flat vessel when the water on which it drifts is
 shaken."

 And the block, asked the company, did not fall into the water of the Elbe?

 The officer repeated: no!

 Strange cried the company.

 The country gentleman was of the opinion that he knew how to choose well
 those stories that would verify his proposition.

 "The third story," the officer continued, "took place in the war of independence
 of the Netherlands, at the siege of Antwerp by the Duke of Parma. The duke had
 blocked the Schelde river by means of a bridge of ships and the Antwerpers were
 working on their side, under the leadership of a talented Italian, to explode the bridge
 by means of fire boats that they launched against it. In that moment, gentlemen, in
 which the vessels float down the Schelde to the bridge, there stands, observe well, a
 cadet officer on the left bank of the Schelde right next to the Duke of Parma: now,
 you understand, now the explosion takes place, and the cadet, complete with flag and
 pack and without the slightest thing happening to him on this journey, stands on the
 right bank. And the Schelde is here, as you will know, a small cannon shot wide."
 "Did you understand?"

 Go to the Devil! shouted the country gentleman.

 I have spoken! said the officer, took his walking stick and hat and left.

 Captain! called the others laughing--Captain! - They wanted at least to know the
 source of this fantastic story that he claimed to be true.

 Let him go, said a member of the gathering: the story [Geschichte] is in the
 appendix to Schillers History of the Revolt of the United Netherlands, and the author
 notes expressly that a poet should not make use of this fact, the history writer
 [Geschichtschreiber], however, because of the irreproachable nature [Unverwerflich-
 keit] of the sources and the agreement of the witnesses is compelled to take it up.
