Title: Tales From the 'Phantasus', etc. of Ludwig Tieck

Author: Ludwig Tieck

Release Date: February 11, 2012 [EBook #38838]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES FROM THE 'PHANTASUS' ***


Produced by Delphine Lettau, Clive Pickton, Matthew Wheaton
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net



THE WHITE EGBERT.


High up in the Hartz Mountains there lived in a castle a knight who
was known by the name of the White Egbert. He was about forty years
old, rather below the middle height; and he obtained his name from the
quantity of short, smooth, white hair which covered his pale haggard
cheeks. He lived a peaceable retired life, never involved in feuds
with his neighbours; indeed, he was seldom seen beyond the walls of
his small castle. His wife loved quiet as much as he; they were
passionately attached to each other; and their only cause of sorrow
was that Heaven had not blessed their union with children.

It was seldom that a guest was seen at the castle; and if ever
such an event did happen, it never was allowed to interfere with
their ordinary way of going on. No advance was made upon the
frugality--almost meanness--with which the establishment was
conducted; the only difference being that at such times Egbert assumed
an air of lightness and gaiety, whereas when alone he was observed to
be reserved and melancholy.

His most frequent visitor was Philip Walters; a man to whom Egbert had
attached himself, because he observed in him, on the whole, a general
resemblance to himself in his ways of thinking. This person was a
native of France, and spent the greater part of his time there; but he
was often for more than six months together in the mountains in the
neighbourhood of Egbert's castle, looking for grasses and minerals, of
which he was a collector. He had a small property of his own, and was
independent of every one. Egbert often accompanied him on these
expeditions, and every year a closer attachment formed itself between
them.

There are hours in every man's life in which, if he has a secret from
his friend, he becomes suddenly in labour with it, and what before he
may have taken the greatest pains to conceal, he now feels an
irresistible impulse to throw out of himself--to lay bare the whole
burden of his heart, that it may form a new link to bind his friend to
him. Friendship ebbs and flows, and is subject to singular influences.
There are moments of violent repulsion; there are others when every
barrier is dissolved, and spirits flow together and mingle into one.

On a dark cloudy evening, one day late in autumn, Egbert was sitting
with his friend and his wife Bertha round the fire in the castle-hall.
The flame flung a bright ruddy glow along the walls, and played and
flickered in the deep oak roof. The night looked in gloomily through
the windows, and the trees outside shook with the wet and the cold.
Walters complained of the distance he had to go to his house, and
Egbert pressed him to stay and spend half the night talking over the
fire, and then accept a room in the castle till next morning. Walters
agreed to do so; wine and supper were brought in; fresh logs of wood
were thrown upon the fire; and the friends' conversation became more
and more easy and confidential.

When the things were taken away, and the servants had retired, Egbert
took Walters' hand, and said, "My dear friend, you must let my wife
Bertha tell you the history of her younger days; it is a very strange
one, and well worth your hearing."

"With the greatest pleasure," said Walters; and they again drew their
chairs round the fire-place.

It was toward midnight; dark masses of cloud were sweeping across the
sky, and the moon looking fitfully out between. "Do not think I am
forcing myself on you," Bertha said. "My husband tells me you are so
noble-hearted a person, it is a shame to conceal any thing from you.
Singular as it may sound, the story I am about to tell you is true.

"I was born in a village in the plains. My father was a poor herdsman.
Our housekeeping was none of the best, and my parents often did not
know where they were to get a mouthful of bread. What was to me most
distressing of all was, that they often quarrelled because they were
poor, and each brought the bitterest complaints against the other for
being the cause of it. Of me, they and every one else said I was a
stupid, silly little creature; that I could not do the commonest thing
properly; and, indeed, I was a good-for-nothing helpless child.
Whatever I took up, I was sure to let fall and break. I could neither
sew, nor spin, nor knit, nor could I learn. I could not help in
managing the house; all I knew was that we were poor and miserable. I
used often to sit in a corner and think how I would help my parents if
I was all of a sudden to get rich; how I would shower gold and silver
on them, and what fun it would be to see how surprised they would
look; and I used to fancy all sorts of spirits sweeping round me, and
shewing me treasures buried under ground; or giving me little pebbles,
which suddenly turned to precious stones. In short, the strangest
notions got hold of me; and when I had to get up and help at any thing
in the house, I was all the stupider about it, because my brain was
running upon these sort of ideas.

"My father was often very angry with me for being such an idle,
useless burden upon him. He sometimes spoke to me very harshly, and it
was seldom that I ever got a kind word from him. So it went on till I
was about eight years old; and now matters got serious--I must learn
to do something. My father thought it was wilfulness and obstinacy in
me, and all I wanted was to spend my time in amusement. Enough: one
day, after a number of threats which all proved fruitless, he gave me
a dreadful beating, and declared I should have the same every day till
I had learned to turn myself to some purpose or other.

"All that night I lay on my bed crying; I felt so wretched and
miserable that I wished to die. I was afraid of the daylight, because
I did not know what to begin about. I wished and wished for every
possible accomplishment, and I could not conceive why I was stupider
than other children that I knew. I was almost in despair. When morning
began to break, I got up; and hardly knowing what I did, I opened the
door of our little cottage. I ran out into the open fields, and
presently into a wood close by, which was so thick that daylight could
hardly find its way into it. I ran on and on without ever looking
behind me. I did not feel the least tired; all I was afraid of was
that my father would catch me, and beat me again worse than before for
running away.

"When I had got to the other side of the wood, the sun was by this
time high in the air, and I saw a dark heavy mass beyond me, covered
with a thick mist. Presently I had to scramble up some hills, and then
to follow a winding rocky path; and now I felt sure I must have found
my way into the neighbouring mountains, and I began to be afraid;
living as I did down in the plains, I had never seen them before; and
the name of mountains, when I heard people speaking of them, had a
somewhat fearful and ominous sound about it. Still, I could not find
courage to return; worse fears drove me forward; I often started and
looked round as the wind moaned among the fir-trees, or a distant
woodman's axe echoed among the hills; and at last when some of the
coalmen and miners met me, and I heard them speaking a language I did
not understand, I was almost frightened out of my senses. Soon,
however, I got used to them, and begged my way on through a number of
villages. People gave me enough to eat and drink, and I had always an
answer ready for any questions that might be asked me. I had gone on
this way for four days, when I fell into a narrow footpath; I followed
it, and it led further and further away from the main road, through a
wholly different sort of country, where the aspect of the mountains
was entirely altered, and became wilder and stranger,--among rocks and
cliff's tumbled rudely one upon another, and looking as if the first
gust of wind would bring them all crashing down. I did not know
whether I should go on or not. It was the middle of summer, so that
hitherto I had spent the night either in the woods or in some one or
other of the shepherds' huts; but here I saw no signs whatever of any
thing like a human habitation, nor in so wild a spot could I hope to
find any. The cliffs grew steeper and more precipitous; often I had to
pass along the edge of abysses that made me giddy even to look at; at
last the very path came to an abrupt conclusion. Now I gave myself up
for lost; I cried and screamed, and all the answer was the echoing of
my voice along the rocky valley; darkness came on, and I looked for a
bank of moss to lie down upon. I could not sleep, for all night long I
heard strange wild noises round me, which sometimes sounded like the
howling of wild beasts; at others, like the screaming of the
mountain-birds, or the moaning of the wind among the rocks and cliffs.
I prayed to God to protect me; and towards morning I fell asleep.

"Day had broken when I awoke. There was a steep hill immediately
before me, which I climbed up, in the hope of finding some way out of
the wilderness; when I had got at the top, however, all around me, as
far as my eye could reach, every thing was buried in fog; in the dull
grey light I could find nothing but rock, rock, rock, not a tree, not
a blade of grass, not a shrub to be seen, only here and there a branch
of heather projecting, with a sad lonely look, from a cleft or chasm
in the mountain's side. I cannot tell you how I craved for the sight
of a human being, if it was only to be afraid of him. I was hungry and
exhausted, and I flung myself down, and determined to lie there and
die. In a little while, however, the desire of life got the better of
this feeling; I raised myself up and walked on, crying and sobbing all
that day through. At last I hardly knew what or where I was; I was so
tired that I had almost lost all consciousness; I scarcely wished to
live, and yet I was afraid to die.

"Towards evening I approached a part where the country resumed a
softer and milder look; and my heart began to beat again, and the
desire of life tingled in all my veins. I fancied I caught the sound
of a mill-wheel in the distance; I redoubled my speed; and oh! how
light and happy I felt when at last I found myself at the end of the
rocks and mountains, and saw once more the woods, and meadows, and
soft swelling pleasant hills, spread smiling out before me! It seemed
as if I had broke at once from hell into Paradise, and I cared no more
for being alone and helpless. Instead of the mill I hoped to find, I
came upon a waterfall, which a good deal diminished my exultation. I
was stooping down, however, to drink some water out of my hands, when
on a sudden I fancied I heard some one cough at a short distance from
me. Never had I a more agreeable surprise than at that moment. I went
towards the place the sound seemed to come from, and on turning the
corner of a wood, I saw an old woman sitting down, apparently resting
herself. She was dressed all in black, a black cap covering her head
and half her face; in her hand she had a crooked stick.

"I went up to her, and asked her to help me. She bade me sit down at
her side, and gave me some bread and a little wine. While I was eating
she chanted a sort of hymn in a harsh, rough voice; and as soon as I
had done, she rose and told me to follow her. Strange and odd as the
old woman's voice and appearance was, I was delighted at this
invitation; she limped away before me, helping herself along with her
stick; and I followed, at first hardly able to keep from laughing at
the strange faces she made at every step. We soon left the mountains
behind us; we walked on over soft grassy meadows, and then along a
forest glade; as we came out again into the open country the sun was
just setting, and the splendour of that evening, and the feeling it
produced in me, I never shall forget. The sky was steeped in gold and
crimson; the trees stood with their tops flushed in the evening glow;
a gleam of enchanting beauty lay upon the fields; every leaf was
hushed and still; and the pure heaven looked down as if the
sky-curtain was withdrawn, and Paradise lay open to our eyes; the
brook bubbled along the valley; and from time to time, as a soft air
swept over the forest, the rustling leaves appeared to gasp for joy.
Visions of the world, and all its strange and wondrous incidents, rose
up before my chilled soul. I forgot myself and my conductress, and
eyes and heart were lost in ecstacy in gazing on those golden clouds.

"We went up a gentle hill which was planted with chestnut-trees; from
the top of which we saw down into a green valley, in the middle of
which, surrounded by a clump of chestnuts, lay a little cottage.
Presently a burst of merry barking greeted us, and a bright beautiful
little dog came bounding and jumping up against the old woman, and
frisking round us with every sign of the greatest satisfaction. Then
he turned to me, and, after looking me all over, seemed tolerably
satisfied, and ran back again to his mistress. As we descended the
hill, I heard a strange kind of song, which seemed to come from the
cottage, and to be sung by a bird:

    'In my forest-bower
      I sing all day,
    Hour after hour,
      To eternity.
    Oh, happy am I
      In my forest-bower!'

These few words were repeated over and over again: the nearest
description I can give of the sound is, that it was like the effect of
a bugle and a cornet answering each other at a great distance over
water.

"My curiosity was at the greatest possible stretch of excitement; and
without waiting for the old woman's permission, I ran into the
cottage. The twilight was beginning to fall; and, by the sinking
light, I found a neat, well-arranged little room, a few cups and
glasses on a sideboard, and some singular-looking boxes on a table. In
a very beautiful cage in the window hung a bird; and it was indeed
from it that the song came which I had heard. The old woman was
coughing and panting, hardly able to recover her breath. She took
scarcely any notice of me--did not even seem to know I was
present--but patted her little dog, and then turned and talked to the
bird, which only answered with singing the same song. All this time I
stood watching her movements; and it almost frightened me to see how
eternally her face kept working and twitching; her head, too, shook as
if age had loosened its hold on her shoulders; and altogether she
looked so odd and strange, that, do what I would, I could not make out
what her features were like.

"When she had got her breath again, she lit a candle, threw a cloth
over a little table, and put out some supper. At last she turned round
to me, and told me to take one of the twisted-cane chairs, and sit
down. I did so, and seated myself exactly opposite to her, with the
light between us. Then she folded her lanky withered fingers together,
and said a long prayer, making all the time such strange contortions
with her face, that again it was all I could do to help bursting out
laughing. But I was afraid of making her angry, and checked myself.
After supper, she said another long grace, and then shewed me a bed in
a little narrow chamber adjoining, she herself sleeping in the room in
which we supped. I was tired and half stupified, and so soon fell
asleep. I awoke several times, however, in the night, and heard the
old woman coughing and talking to her dog, and the bird now and
then--which seemed to be in a dream--bringing out single words and
lines of its song. The chestnuts rustled outside the window; far away
a nightingale was singing; and all these sounds together made so odd a
mixture, that I could hardly persuade myself I was awake, and that I
had not fallen into another still stranger dream.

"In the morning the old woman woke me up, and presently set me to
work. I had to spin, and I soon learnt how to do it; and besides this,
I had to take care of the dog and the bird. I very quickly got into
the way of managing the household matters, and of knowing the uses of
the different articles. One can get used to any condition, and I was
no exception: I soon ceased to think there was any thing odd about the
old woman, that the cottage was remarkably situated, and that one
never saw any other human being there, or that the bird was so very
extraordinary a creature. I was delighted with its beauty; all its
feathers glittered with every conceivable colour, the brightest
sky-blue alternating with deep scarlet over its head and body; and
when it sang, it swelled itself out so proudly, that the colours
shewed more brilliantly than ever.

"The old woman often went out in the morning, and did not return till
evening, when I used to go out with the little dog to meet her; and
she would call me her child, her little daughter. In one's childhood
one soon takes to people, and I became exceedingly attached to her. In
the evenings she would teach me to read, and I was quick and ready in
learning; and this afterwards, when I was much alone, became a source
of infinite amusement to me; for she had a number of old manuscript
books in the cottage, full of fairy-tales, and all sorts of queer old
stories.

"There is something very odd about my recollections of the way I went
on then. Not a human creature ever came near us; our home
family-circle certainly was not an extensive one; and the dog and the
bird make the same impression on me now that the recollection of long
and well-known old friends produces; yet, often and often as I must
have repeated it, do what I will, I cannot call back again the
singular name of the little dog.

"So things went on for some four years or more; and I must have been
about twelve years old, when the old woman took me at last deeper into
her confidence, and revealed to me a secret. Every day the bird laid
an egg; and in each egg was a pearl, or some other precious stone. I
had often observed before that she had some mysterious doings with the
cage; but I had never troubled myself much about it. Now, however, she
gave me a charge while she was absent to take these eggs, and put them
by carefully in the odd-looking boxes. Leaving me sufficient food in
her absence, she would now be away sometimes weeks and months at a
time; and my wheel went round, and the little dog barked, and the bird
sang, and all was so still in the country round, that while I was
there I do not remember a single storm. No foot of man ever strayed
there; no wild beast ever came near our dwelling; I worked on there
day after day, and I was happy. Oh, fortunate indeed would men be, if
they could but go on through life in such peace and quiet to their
graves!

"From the little that I read, I made myself a set of notions of what
the world was, and what men were; and very queer ones they were; for
they were all taken from myself and the society in which I lived. If
we talked of gay, bright, happy people, I could only fancy them like
the little dog; beautiful stately ladies must look like the bird, and
ancient dames like my old woman. My stories contained something about
love, and I made myself the heroine of many wonderful adventures: I
pictured for myself the most beautiful knight the world had ever seen;
I adorned him with every grace and every perfection; and though, after
all my trouble, I could not tell exactly what he was like, I could
feel the most passionate despair if he did not return my affection;
and I had all sorts of eloquent speeches to make--which I would often
repeat aloud--to win his love. You smile! Ah, well, we are none of us
young now!

"I was much the happiest when I was by myself; for then I was absolute
mistress in the cottage. The dog was very fond of me, and did all that
I wished; the bird replied with his song to all my questions; my wheel
went round merrily; and I never for a moment felt a wish for any
change. When the old woman came back from her long expeditions, she
would praise me for being so good and attentive. Her household, she
said, was much better attended to since I had been there; she was
pleased with my growth, and the general healthiness of my appearance;
in short, she spoke to me and treated me exactly as if I had been her
daughter. 'You are going on well indeed, my child,' she said one day,
with a roughish coarse voice: 'if you continue in this way, you will
never come to any mischief. But, you may depend upon it, it never
fails, if once one gets out of the right road, but sooner or later we
shall be punished for it.' I took little notice of this at the time
she said it; for in all I did and said I was a lively, thoughtless
child; but by and by, in the night, her words recurred to me, and I
could not conceive what she meant. I thought them all over and over
again. I had often read about riches and wealth, and so on; and at
last it occurred to me that those pearls and precious stones must be
of great value. This soon became more plain to me; but what could she
have meant by the right road? I could not make any thing of it, do
what I would.

"I was now fourteen years old; and it is unfortunate for people that
generally they only get their understanding to lose their innocence by
the light of it. I now came clearly enough to comprehend that it would
be easy for me, while the old woman was away, to take the bird and the
jewels, and go with them into the world that I had read about; and
then very likely I might find my beautiful knight, who still continued
in my thoughts.

"At first this idea was no more than any other, just flashing across
my mind and then gone again; but when I sat by myself at my wheel, in
spite of myself it kept coming back to me, till at last it completely
took possession of my mind; and I already saw myself dressed with the
greatest magnificence, with knights and princes standing round me; and
so I would let myself dream on, and then when I started up and found
myself in a little narrow room, I felt vexed and disappointed. For the
rest, so that I did what I was told, the old woman did not trouble
herself about what was passing in my mind.

"One day she went away again, telling me that this time she would be
absent longer than usual; I was to see that every thing was kept
right, and do what I could to prevent the time hanging heavy on my
hands. I took leave of her with some distress, as I felt a misgiving
that I should never see her again; I stood watching her a long time as
she hobbled away, almost without knowing myself why I was so unhappy.
It seemed as if my purpose was already before my mind, and yet I was
not actually conscious of it.

"Never did I take so much care of the dog and the bird as now; they
seemed closer to my heart than they had been before. The old woman had
been gone some days, when one morning I got up with the fixed purpose
to leave the cottage with the bird, and go and look for what was
called the world. Still I felt unhappy and miserable. I wished to stay
where I was, and yet this thought had got too strong a hold on me;
there was a singular struggle going on in my soul, as if two opposite
spirits were fighting in me. One moment came the sweetness of that
sequestered spot before me, looking so beautiful; and then the next,
the ravishing idea of a new world, and all the wonderful things in it.
I hardly knew what to make of myself. The little dog kept jumping up
upon me incessantly. The sunshine lay spread out brilliantly over the
green fields, and the chestnut-leaves glistened as it fell on them.
Suddenly I felt a strong impulse seize me; I caught the little dog and
tied it up in the cottage, and then took the cage and the bird under
my arm. The dog whined and struggled at this unusual treatment; he
looked up at me with imploring eyes, but I could not venture to take
him with me. One of the boxes of precious stones I took and made fast
to my girdle, the rest I left in their places. The bird stretched and
strained with his head in an odd wild way as I went out with him
through the door; the dog sprung at his chain to follow me; but he was
bound fast, and he was obliged to stay. I avoided the road that led to
the mountains, and went down the valley the opposite way. The little
dog kept whining and barking incessantly, and I felt for him in my
heart; the bird made one or two attempts to sing, but it seemed he did
not like being carried, and would not go on.

"For a long time I heard the barking of the dog, getting weaker and
fainter, however, as I got further away; at last it ceased altogether.
I cried, and had almost turned about and gone back again, but the
craving for something new urged me forward. I was soon over the hill,
and I walked on through wood and meadow till towards evening, when I
found myself near a village. I felt rather frightened at first in
going into an inn among strange people; but they shewed me into a
chamber with a bed, and I slept there very comfortably, only that I
dreamed of the old woman, who seemed to threaten me.

"My journey had very little variety; but the further I went, the more
I was haunted by the recollection of the old woman and the little dog.
The poor little thing, I thought, would be sure to die of hunger,
without me to help it; and at every turn in the forest I expected to
see the figure of the old woman coming to meet me. Sighing and
weeping, I travelled on: whenever I stopped to rest myself, and set
the cage down upon the ground, the bird would sing his strange song,
and then bitter feelings of regret would come upon me for the dear old
cottage. So forgetful is our nature, I thought my first journey had
not been half so miserable as that, and I craved to be again once more
as I was then.

"I had parted with some of the jewels, and at last, after a long round
of walking, one day I came to a village. I felt a strange emotion on
entering it; I was overcome by something, and could not tell why. Very
soon, however, I recollected myself, and found I was in the village
where I was born. How surprised I was! a thousand reminiscences came
pouring back upon me, and the tears ran down my cheeks. It was very
much altered. New houses had sprung up; others, which were new when I
went away, were crumbling to the ground; I found traces of burning
also; and every thing looked much smaller and more confined than I had
fancied. I was infinitely delighted, however, at the thought of seeing
my father and mother again after so long an absence. I found the
little cottage; the well-known doorway; the handle of the door was
exactly as it used to be; it seemed like yesterday that I had had it
in my hand. My heart beat and throbbed; I opened the door hastily; but
all the faces in the room were strange to me; they stared at me as I
entered. I asked for old Martin the shepherd; but they told me he and
his wife had been dead for three years past. I drew back as quickly as
I could, and went crying out of the village.

"I had been thinking how delightful it would be to surprise them with
all my riches; the strangest accident had realised the dreams of my
childhood--I could make them happy--and now all was vain. They could
not share with me; and what all my life long had been the dearest
object of my hope was lost to me for ever.

"I went to a pleasant-looking town, where I rented a small house with
a garden, and took a servant to live with me. I did not find the world
quite the wonderful place I expected; but I soon learnt to think less
and less of the old woman and the cottage I had lived in with her; and
so altogether I lived on pleasantly enough.

"For a long time the bird had left off singing, so that I was not a
little frightened when one night he began again with a different song.

    'My forest-bower,
      Thou'rt far from me;
    Oh, hour by hour
      I grieve for thee:
    Ah, when shall I see
      My forest-bower?'

I could not sleep all night. The whole thing came back again into my
thoughts, and I felt more clearly than ever that I had done what I
ought not. When I got up, the bird's head was turned towards me; he
kept watching me with a strange expression, and seemed to be
reproaching me. Now he never stopped singing; and his song came louder
and deeper I thought than it had ever been before. The more I looked
at him, the more uncomfortable he made me. At last I opened the cage,
thrust in my hand and caught him by the neck. I pressed my fingers
violently together; he looked imploringly in my face; I let him go;
but he was already dead: I buried him in the garden.

"After this I was haunted by a fear of my servant; my conscience told
me what I had done, and I was afraid that some day or other she would
be robbing, or perhaps murdering me. Shortly, however, I became
acquainted with a young knight, who pleased me exceedingly. I gave him
my hand; and here, Herr Walters, is my story ended."

"Ah, you should have seen her then," Egbert broke in hastily; "her
youthful freshness and beauty; and what an indescribable charm she had
received from her retired education! She came before me as a kind of
miraculous being, and I set no bounds to my affection for her. I was
poor myself; indeed I had nothing; but through her love I was placed
in the position in which you find me. We withdrew hither, and neither
of us has ever, for a single moment, regretted our union."

"But see, with our talking and chatting," interrupted Bertha, "it is
already past midnight; we had better go to bed."

She rose to retire to her chamber; as they parted Walters kissed her
hand, and wished her good night. "Thanks, noble lady," he said, "for
your story. I think I can see you with your strange bird, and feeding
the little Strohmian."

Walters, too, retired to sleep; but Egbert continued restlessly pacing
up and down the hall. "What fools we men are!" he said to himself.
"Was it not I that prevailed on my wife to tell her story? and now I
am sorry it should have been told! Will he not make use of it for some
evil purpose? Will he not blab, and let our secret out to others? Is
he not very likely (it is just what a man would naturally do) to feel
some accursed hankering after one's jewels, and lay some plan or other
to get hold of them?"

It struck him Walters had not taken leave of him with, as much
heartiness as he naturally would have done after being admitted into
such a piece of confidence. When once a man has admitted a feeling of
suspicion into his breast, every trifle becomes a confirmation of it.
Then for a moment he would feel ashamed of so ungenerous a distrust
of his noble-hearted friend; and yet he could not fling it off; all
night long these feelings kept swaying to and fro through his breast.
He slept but little.

The next morning Bertha was unwell, and could not appear at breakfast.
Walters did not seem much to distress himself about it, and of the
knight also he took leave with apparent unconcern. Egbert could not
well make it out; he went to his wife's room, she was in a violent
fever; she said she supposed telling her story the preceding night
must have over-excited her.

After that evening Walters came seldom to his friend's castle; and
when he did he never stayed, but went away again almost immediately
with a few unmeaning words. Egbert was excessively distressed at this
behaviour: he never said any thing about it, either to his wife or to
Walters; but they must both have seen that there was something which
made him uneasy. Bertha's illness too was another subject of distress
to him. The physician became alarmed; the colour faded from her
cheeks, and her eyes grew of an unnatural brightness. One morning she
called her husband to her bedside, and sent the servants out of the
room.

"My dear husband," she began, seriously, "I have something to tell
you, which, however unmeaning and trifling it may seem to you, has
been the cause of all my illness, and has almost driven me out of my
senses. You know that whenever I have spoken of the events of my
childhood, in spite of all the trouble I have taken, I have never been
able to think of the name of the little dog that was so long with me.
The other evening as Walters took leave of me, he said, suddenly, 'I
fancy I see you feeding the little Strohmian.' Can it be accident that
he hit upon the name? or does he know the dog, and said what he did on
purpose? In what mysterious way is this man bound up with my destiny?
At times I try to persuade myself that it is all fancy; but no, it is
certainly true, too true. I cannot tell you how it has terrified me
to be so helped out with my recollection by a perfect stranger: what
do you say, Egbert?"

Egbert regarded his suffering wife with the deepest emotion. For some
time he could not speak, but stood lost in his own reflections. At
last he muttered a few words of consolation, and left her. He retired
to a remote apartment, and paced up and down in indescribable
uneasiness. Walters had for many years been his only companion; and
now was this man the only one in the world whose existence was a pain
and grief to him. Could this one being be removed out of his path,
all, he thought, would then be well with him. To dissipate his
unpleasant reflections, he took his cross-bow and went out into the
mountains to hunt.

It was a rough stormy winter's day; the snow lay deep upon the
hill-side, and the heavy branches of the pine-trees bent under their
burden. He scrambled rapidly on; the sweat stood upon his brow; but he
could not light on any game, and that increased his ill-humour.
Suddenly he saw a figure moving at some distance from him: it was
Walters, who was gathering moss from the trunks of the trees. Hardly
knowing what he did, he levelled his cross-bow at him; Walters looked
round, and raised his hand with a menacing gesture; but the bolt was
sped to its mark, and he fell to the earth.

Egbert now felt relieved from a heavy burden. Yet a feeling of terror
drove him hastily back to his castle. He had a long way to go; for he
had wandered far away into the forests. When he reached it, Bertha was
already dead: on her deathbed she had spoken incessantly of Walters
and the old woman.

Egbert now lived for a long time entirely alone. He had always been
dark and gloomy enough; for his wife's strange history troubled him,
and he was continually afraid some terrible misfortune would befall
them. His own conscience made him uneasy also. His friend's murder
was for ever before his eyes, and his life was an eternal
self-upbraiding.

As some relief to his feelings, he went from time to time to the next
great town, where he could find society and forget himself in feasting
and dissipation. He longed to find a friend to fill up the dreary
chasm in his soul; and then again when he thought of Walters, he
shrunk in terror from it, as he felt convinced that any friend must
only be a source of new misery to him. So many years he had lived with
Bertha in their sweet seclusion, Walters' friendship had so long been
his greatest delight; and now both were suddenly snatched away from
him. There were many moments when it all seemed to him like a strange,
wild romance, and that he only dreamt that he was alive.

A young knight, Hugo, attached himself to the silent, gloomy Egbert,
and seemed to be inspired with a real deep affection for him. Egbert
was very much surprised, and came forward to meet this new offer of
friendship the more readily because it was so entirely unexpected. The
two were now continually together. The stranger shewed Egbert every
possible attention. Neither ever rode out without the other; in short,
wherever they were, they appeared inseparable.

Yet it was only for a very brief interval that Egbert allowed himself
to feel happy; for he was too sure that Hugo only loved him because he
did not know his history. His friend was in an error respecting him;
and he felt the same impulse as he had done before to unbosom himself
to him, that he might be assured whether he was indeed his friend or
not. Then, again, caution kept him back, and the fear of becoming an
object of abhorrence to Hugo; there were times when he was so terribly
oppressed with a sense of his unworthiness that he could not believe
any one who was not an utter stranger to him could entertain the
slightest regard for him. For all that, however, he could not contain
himself; and one day as they were walking by themselves, he told his
whole history, and then asked whether he could still love a murderer.
Hugo was touched, and tried to comfort him; and Egbert returned with a
lighter heart to the town.

Yet it seemed to be his curse that a feeling of suspicion must arise
even in the hour of confidence; for hardly were they returned to their
room, and the glare of the candle was thrown upon his friend's face,
than he found something there which displeased him. He fancied he
could trace a malicious laugh. It struck him too that Hugo did not
seem so ready to talk to him as usual, and that his attention was
almost entirely given to the other persons present. There was an old
knight in the party who had never been a friend of Egbert, and used to
ask unpleasant questions about his wife, and where he got his money
from.... To this person Hugo attached himself, and the two held a long
mysterious conversation together, while their looks were from time to
time directed towards himself. Here he saw all his suspicions at once
confirmed. He believed he was betrayed, and his fierce and gloomy
temper now got complete mastery over him. As he stood with his eyes
fixed on them as they talked, suddenly he saw Walters' face, his air,
his gesture--the whole figure so familiar to him. He looked again; and
now he was convinced that it was no one but Walters that was speaking
with the old knight.... In unutterable terror, almost beside himself,
he rushed out of the room, and that night left the city, and returned
as fast as possible to his castle.

He wandered restlessly from chamber to chamber; not a thought could he
find to soothe him; sleep fled from his eyes, and from one terrible
imagination he could only fall into another yet more terrible. He
thought he must be mad, and that what he had seen was but a crazed
dream; but Walters' features had been too vivid, and all was again a
riddle. He resolved to leave the castle, and set out upon his travels,
to bring his mind again into order: every thought of friendship, every
wish for society, he had now given up for ever.

He set out without having made up his mind which way he would go;
indeed he thought little of the country through which he passed. One
day he had been riding for some time at a rapid pace among the
mountains, when he found himself suddenly involved in a labyrinth of
rocks, from which he could not discover any way of escape. At last he
fell in with an old countryman, who shewed him a path leading past a
waterfall. He offered the old man some money as a reward, but he
declined to accept it.

"What is the matter with me?" said Egbert to himself; "I could have
fancied this was Walters again." He looked round, and Walters it
certainly was. Egbert spurred his horse on at its utmost speed; he
flew away over rocks and through woods and meadows, until at length it
sunk exhausted under him to the earth. He did not pause to think of
this, but continued to hurry on on foot.

In a kind of half-dream, he climbed a little hill; he fancied he heard
the lively barking of a dog somewhere near him. Tall chestnuts rustled
in the wind, and he caught the strange wild strains of a song:

    "In my forest-home
      Again sing I,
    Where pain hath no life;
      No envy and strife.
    Oh, am I not happy
      In my forest home?"

Egbert was completely stupified, his senses reeled; all seemed a dark
painful riddle to him. He could not tell whether he was dreaming now,
or whether he had not dreamt of a Bertha as his wife. The common and
the wonderful were so strangely mingled together; the world round him
was enchanted.... His thoughts and recollections swam confusedly
before his mind.

A crooked hump-backed old woman came panting up the hill with a
crutch.

"Are you come to bring me my bird? my pearls? my dog?" she screamed
to him; "see how wickedness is its own punisher! I was your friend
Walters--I was Hugo."

"God in heaven," muttered Egbert to himself, "to what dreadful place
have I wandered? Where am I?"

"And Bertha was your sister."

Egbert fell to the ground.

"What made her run away from me in that way? the time of trial was
almost over, and thus all had ended well. She was the daughter of a
knight; he sent her to the herdsman to be brought up. She was your
father's daughter."

"Oh, why, why have I ever had this dreadful foreboding?" cried Egbert.

"Because when you were young you once heard your father speak of it.
He could not let her stay with him, for he was afraid of his wife; she
was the child of an earlier marriage."

Egbert's heartstrings burst; he lay gasping out his life upon the
ground; faintly and more faintly he heard the old woman speak, the dog
bark, and the bird chant on his unwearying song.

