Johann Peter Hebel
The Cheap Meal
in: Johann Peter Hebel: The Treasure Chest. Penguin: London 1995 [1994], p. 6f.


There is an old saying: The biter is sometimes bit. But the
landlord at the Lion in a certain little town was bitten first. He
received a well-dressed customer who curtly demanded a good
bowl of broth, the best his money would buy. Then he ordered
beef and vegetables too for his money. The landlord asked him,
all politeness, if he wouldn't like a glass of wine with it. 'Indeed I
would,' his guest replied, 'if I can have a good one for my money.'
When he had finished, and he enjoyed it all, he took a wom sixkreuzer
piece from his pocket and said, 'Here you are, landlord,
there' s my money!' The landlord said, 'What' s this? You owe me a
thaler!' The customer answered, 'I didn't ask for a meal for a
thaler, but for my money. Here it is. lt's all I have. If you gave me
too much for it then that's your fault!' lt wasn't really such a clever trick. lt called only for cheek and a devil-may-care view of the consequences. But the best is yet to come. 
'You're an utter villain,' said the landlord, 'and don't deseive
this. But you can have the meal for nothing and take this twentyfour
kreuzer bit as well. Just keep quiet about it and go over to my
neighbour who keeps the Bear and try the same trick on him!' He
said this because he had had a quarre! with his neighbour and
resented his success and each was keen to do the other down.

But the artful customer smiled as he took the money he was
offered in his one hand and reached carefully for the door with
the other, wished the innkeeper good afternoon, and said, 'I went
to the Bear first, it was the landlord there who sent me over here!'

So really both of the innkeepers had been tricked; the cunning
customer took advantage of their quarrel. Yet he might have also
earned a further reward, grateful thanks from both of them, if
they had learnt the right lesson from it and had made things up
between them. For peace pays, whereas quarrels have to be paid
for.
